\section{Related work}
\label{sec:related}

While the temporal models in the relational literature are very
mature, the same cannot be said for the evolving graphs literature.
Evolving graph models differ in what time model they adopt (point or
interval stamping), what top-level entities they model (graphs or sets
of nodes and edges), whether they represent topology only or
attributes or weights as well, and what types of evolution are
allowed.  All evolving graph models require node identity, and thus
edge identity as well, to persist across time.  See~\cite{Zaki2016}
for a survey of evolving graph models.

The first mention of evolving graphs that we are aware of is by Harary
and Gupta~\cite{Harary1997} who informally proposed to model the
evolution as a sequence of static graphs.  This model has been
predominant in the research literature
since~\cite{Borgwardt2006,Chan2008,Fard2012,Ferreira2004,Kan2009,Khurana2013,Lahiri2008,Lerman2010,Ren2011,Semertzidis2015,Sricharan2014,Yang2007},
with various restrictions on the kinds of changes that can take place
in the graph evolution.  For example, Khurana and Deshponde use this
model but a node, once removed, cannot reappear~\cite{Khurana2013}.
In~\cite{Ren2011} and~\cite{Fard2012} there is no notion of time at
all, only a sequence of graphs.  In~\cite{Borgwardt2006}
and~\cite{Kan2009} the time series of graphs represent topology only,
with no attributes, and only edges can vary with time, while the nodes
remain unchanged.  Ferreira's model~\cite{Ferreira2004} allows both
node and edge evolution, but again, only restricted to topology.

This approach has several limitations.  First and foremost, the state
of the graph can be undefined at some time $t$ unless a snapshot is
associated with each possible value in the discrete range $[t_{start},
  now)$.  So either there are many consecutive equivalent snapshots or
  the state of the graph is undefined.  It also forces a specific time
  granularity since the time is discrete, whereas open-closed time
  intervals can be broken down into any desired level of granularity.
  Just as importantly, this introduces a semantic ambiguity that we
  explored in Section~\ref{sec:intro}.

The advantages of the snapshot sequence model are that a) it is simple
and b) if snapshots are obtained by periodic sampling, which is a very
common approach, it accurately represents the state at that point
without making statements about other unknowable times.  For example,
the WWW is so large that it is impossible to create a fully accurate
snapshot that represents any moment in time.

Several models use the interval time model, although without the full
interval semantics.  Huo and Tsotras model an evolving graph as a set
of nodes and a set of edges where each entity is
interval-stamped~\cite{Huo2014}.  The semantics of the intervals is
not stated.  Similary, Koloniari~\cite{Koloniari2012}, while not
providing a formal model, represents nodes and edges as having periods
of validity.

There are several important system works on evolving graphs which do
not have a formal model.  The ImmortalGraph (formally Chronos) system
has no formal model, but informally an evolving graph is defined as a
series of activities on the graph, such as node additions and
deletions~\cite{Miao2015}.  This is a streaming or delta approach,
which is popular in temporal databases because it is unambiguous and
compact.  The G* system also does not propose a formal model for
evolving graphs, even though it can be used for storing and analyzing
them by maintaining periodic snapshots~\cite{Labouseur2015}.  So while
there is no explicit notion of time in G*, it essentially uses
discrete time snapshot sequence model, with all limitations thereof.
For each graph, it adopts a nested data model, with vertices nested
within the graph, and edges within the corresponding vertices.

This situation has persisted over 20 years, due in large part to the
fact that most papers lack formal semantics of the model or the
operations, which are generally specified algorithmically.  However,
the question of semantics of temporal data has been throughly explored
in the relational temporal database community.  B{\"{o}}hlen et
al.~\cite{Bohlen1998} have formally stated the point- and
interval-based models and crisply defined the differences between
them.  With this foundation, Dign{\"{o}}s et al.~\cite{Dignos2012}
have defined sequence (interval) semantics properties of snapshot
reducibility, extended snapshot reducibility, and change preservation,
and shown how nontemporal operators can be applied to temporal data.
As we as a community move to more and more sophisticated analyses of
evolving graphs, we need to adopt the state of the art in temporal
databases.
