\section{Related Work}
\label{sec:related}

{\bf Conceptual models.}  While the temporal models in the relational
literature are very mature, the same cannot be said for the evolving
graphs literature.  Evolving graph models differ in what time model
they adopt (point or interval), what top-level entities they model
(graphs or sets of nodes and edges), whether they represent topology
only or attributes or weights as well, and what types of evolution are
allowed.  All evolving graph models require node identity, and thus
edge identity as well, to persist across time.

The first mention of evolving graphs that we are aware of is by Harary
and Gupta~\cite{Harary1997} who informally proposed to model the
evolution as a sequence of static graphs\eat{, as depicted in
  Figure~\ref{fig:snapshots}}.  This model has been predominant in the
research literature
since~\cite{Ferreira2004,Kan2009,Khurana2013,Lerman2010,Ren2011,Semertzidis2015},
with various restrictions on the kinds of changes that can take place
in the graph evolution.  For example, Khurana and Deshpande use this
model but a node, once removed, cannot reappear~\cite{Khurana2013}.
In~\cite{Labouseur2015,Ren2011} there is no notion of time at all,
only a sequence of graphs.  \eat{In~\cite{Borgwardt2006}
  and~\cite{Kan2009} the time series of graphs represent topology
  only, with no attributes, and only edges can vary with time, while
  the nodes remain unchanged.  Ferreira's model~\cite{Ferreira2004}
  allows both node and edge evolution, but again, only restricted to
  topology.}

The advantages of the snapshot sequence model are that it is simple
and if snapshots are obtained by periodic sampling, which is a very
common approach, it accurately represents the state at that point
without making statements about other unknowable times.  For example,
the WWW is so large that it is impossible to create a fully accurate
snapshot that represents any moment in time.

\eat{The snapshot sequence approach has several limitations.  The state of
the graph can be undefined at some time $t$ unless a snapshot is
associated with each possible value in the discrete range $[t_{start},
  now)$.  So either there are many consecutive equivalent snapshots or
  the state of the graph is undefined.  It also forces a specific time
  granularity since the time is discrete, whereas open-closed time
  intervals can be broken down into any desired level of granularity.}
  \eat{Second, it is not compact: every change to an entity (node or
    edge) requires a new snapshot.  For large graphs, consecutive
    snapshots have degree of similarity approaching 1 (on the scale of
    0 of no similarity and 1 full similarity).  The compactness of a
    logical model is not a critical issue since many different
    physical representations can support it efficiently.  }

The biggest problem with the snapshot sequence as the underlying
conceptual model is that it restricts the range of operations that can
be naturally expressed.  For example, it is impossible to select a
subgraph over a snapshot sequence using a temporal predicate, as we do
in Definition~\ref{def:subv}, because each snapshot is nontemporal and
independent of the others.  Stated formally, the snapshot
  sequence model lacks the extended snapshot reducibility property.

A sequence of snapshots can be computed from our model with a slice
over all time points.  We emphasize that the choice of the logical
model impacts the expressiveness of the algebra and advocate our model
over the snapshot sequence from that perspective.  Our model supports
fully evolved graphs (both topological and attribute evolution for
both nodes and edges), uses time intervals for time granularity, and
provides both graph-centric and entity-centric views.

{\bf Evolving graph queries.}  Evolving graph analysis and mining have
been receiving increased attention over the past few years.  Several
researchers have proposed individual queries, or classes of queries,
for evolving graphs, but without a unifying syntax or general
framework.

The proposed operators can also be divided into temporal, i.e., those
that return a temporal result, and nontemporal.

Temporal operators include retrieval of version data for a particular
node and edge~\cite{George2006}, of
journeys~\cite{Casteigts2011,George2009}, subgraph by time or
attributes~\cite{Huo2014,Khurana2016}, snapshot
analytics~\cite{Khurana2016,Labouseur2015,Miao2015}, and computation
of time-varying versions of whole-graph analytics like maximal
time-connected component~\cite{Ferreira2004} and dynamic graph
centrality~\cite{Lerman2010}.

Nontemporal operators are focused on local and global point queries.
George and Shekhar support retrieval of specific nodes, edges, or
routes at a specific time point~\cite{George2006}.  The same
functionality is also supported in the Historical Graph
Store~\cite{Khurana2016} and in Koloniari et al.~\cite{Koloniari2012}.
Georte et al. support anomaly detection through a subgraph query to
locate specific nodes that have anomalous readings (compared to the
domain model) at any time point~\cite{George2009}.  Khurana and
Deshpande provide a snapshot retrieval operation for a specific time
point~\cite{Khurana2013}, as does the G* system~\cite{Labouseur2015}.
The main focus in all these approaches is the physical layout of the
data and the access methods for fastest retrieval.  

Note that any closed algebra on evolving graphs cannot support these
operators directly because the result is inherently nontemporal.
However, the spirit of the queries can be supported through subgraphs
with a temporal predicate or with \insql{trim}.
